Annie Hall is a film about a comedian, Alvy Singer (Woody Allen), who falls in love with Annie Hall (Diane Keaton). Both of the characters are completely different but both strikingly entertaining and unusual. Alvy is an extreme pessimist that obsesses over the subject of death and has very sarcastic and cynical views about the world and the people around him. Annie is a ditsy and clumsy talented singer and photographer. When Alvy and Annie meet for the first time they are instantly attracted to each other and as a result their conversations are awkward but never the less adorable. The film takes you through the couple's love lives, before and after their relationship. Alvy often comes out of the scene he is in to talk directly to the audience about his views on whatever situation he is in, this makes the film unusual but more interesting. The film is very sweet and funny but unfortunately quite sad as well.

Alvy Singer is a neurotic comedian who desperately wants to analyze his relationship with his former girlfriend Annie Hall. The beginning is romantic. Then problems arise. He is not too enthusiastic about her idea of moving in with him, and leaving her flat. He dislikes her habit of smoking weed before having sex and her lack of education. After applying to university she soon gets attracted to a professor. Alvy and Annie broke up in a fight. He tries to calm down, starts a new relationship but with no success. After a while she calls him and they start again, convinced they will make it this time. Everything looks wonderful. But soon they both reveal to their shrinks that the relationship has gone sour again. After visiting California they break up, peacefully this time. Alvy is proud about their calm transcend from relationship to friendship. He tries to date another woman but again with no success. He gets a panic attack and flies to California where Annie is in a happy relationship. She rejects him. He gets so upset that he ends up in prison. After coming back to New York he writes a play about their relationship, but with a happy ending. He meets her again later in New York with some other guy. They go for lunch as friends, remembering their good time. At the end he realises that although relationships are absurd and irrational, we still need to go through them. We need to believe they are not what they are. 